# Introduction


## Thesis Overview

Networks are ubiquitous data structures that allow the representation of interactions between objects. Complex networks encompass real-world networks with non-trivial structural properties such as social networks of individuals in the society or information networks constituted of interconnected documents. For instance, one could think about the Web as made up of web pages interconnected by hyperlinks, or academic papers connected by citations. Their study comes with many exciting questions concerning the laws governing them, their dynamics and their invariant properties. Such questions are motivated by a better understanding of the *emergent* phenomena raised by the formation of complex interacting systems as well as the development of tools to enhance their analysis. The analysis of complex networks is a modern field of science that started around the fifty with the introduction of graph theory, motivated by questions from sociologists and psychologist seeking for a mathematical representation in order to study the patterns and regularities resulting from relations between various entities [@harary1953graph]. It quickly gained interest as the data and the computing resources became largely accessible and "cheap"^[See for example \url{https://www.blogdumoderateur.com/chiffres-reseaux-sociaux/}]. The science of networks represents an opportunity for many scientific communities to interact and share knowledge, due to the diversity of the sources from which networks arise on one side, and the common phenomena that occur in their midst in the other [@wasserman1994social].

On the other hand, Machine Learning is a discipline at the crossroads of applied mathematics and computer science that aims at building algorithms able to *explore* various kinds of observable information such as texts, images, time-series or networks.
The purpose of this exploration is to shape an abstract view of the observable information, also called the training data [@michalski2013machine]. This abstract view is referred to as a model and is used to accomplish some prediction tasks on unobserved or future outcomes.
The process of (machine) learning consists of fitting a model with the data which, in general, is reduced to a mathematical optimization problem ^[Most of the time, the learning process can be cast into an optimization problem, but not always, as for MCMC techniques (\ref{sec:network_inference}) for example.] of an objective function. This measures, in some sense, how well the model explains the data. A Machine Learning model can be seen as a data "observer" that tries to explain the data it observes. However, as one can imagine, the observation of "complex" data may result in many different interpretations depending on the beliefs of the observer, and thus choosing a "good" explanation, or model, is uncertain. Probabilistic Machine Learning is a general framework used to develop models that incorporate beliefs and deals with the uncertainty. A decisive question though, is the choice of the appropriate beliefs and degree of uncertainty according to the data observed, and ultimately the decisions to make regarding these data [@ghahramani15_nature].

The context of this thesis is to study and develop probabilistic machine learning based approach towards complex networks analysis. This approach provides a rich framework to capture network properties and develop statistical procedures (i.e. inference) that efficiently extract information from network datasets, predict their evolution, while controlling the uncertainty levels that are inherent to complex networks.
The objective is twofold.
Firstly, we want to understand what particular models are adapted for complex networks and why. Our study led us to random graph models as they represent a general well founded framework for modeling a very large set of networks and their ability to control the amount of knowledge "a priori", or "assumptions", about the networks by design.  In particular, we study a family of probabilistic models, called Mixed-Membership models, characterized by hierarchical relations of latent variables that encodes the modular structure of networks trough the concept of "community" [@MMM]. This family of models extends the former Stochastic Blockmodel [@goldenberg2010survey] by allowing the entities of a network to belongs to several communities^[Which is akin to soft clustering.]. An open question though, is the characterization of those models regarding the emergent properties found in networks [@Newman2010]. We especially focused on the homophily, often refers to with the statement "*Birds of a feather flock together*" [@mcpherson2001birds], and the preferential attachment effect, frequently refers to with the statement "*the rich get richer and the poor get poorer*" [@barabasi1999emergence]. We proposed in this direction, formal definitions of those properties adapted to the probabilistic framework and we study to what extent the models satisfy those properties with respect to the proposed definitions.
Secondly, we aim to generalize those models to overcome some of their limitations, such as modelling networks based on binary relations only and the scalability issues regarding large networks. To do this, we proposed an adaptation of the former Mixed-Membership Stochastic Blockmodel [@MMSB] in order to model weighted edge covariates based on the Poisson Distribution. Further, we proposed a flexible hierarchical prior over the rate parameters of the Poisson distributions to give flexibility to the connectivity strength within the latent communities.

## Thesis Outline

This manuscript is organized into 5 chapters. 
The Chapters 2 and 3 review the state of the art of the topic. They are devoted to setting out the background of the main results of this thesis and to put them in perspective by exposing the associated relevant literature, and giving some fundamental theoretical building blocks. In particular, Chapter 2 focuses on complex networks analysis and mining aspects by reviewing some of the key properties observed in real networks and applications. In Chapter 3, we concentrate on the probabilistic framework for random graph models and theoretic foundations. In those preliminaries chapters our motivation is to provide elements of response to the following questions:

* What kind of network data are we interested in and what are their properties? (\ref{sec:network_type}, \ref{sec:network_property})
* What kind of prediction tasks do we want to solve with those models?  (\ref{sec:network_application})
* What models exist to extract knowledge from the data and infer new outcomes, and what are the theoretic foundations of the model of interest? (\ref{sec:network_model}, \ref{sec:random_graph})
* What learning processes and inference methods are used to fit the models to the data? (\ref{sec:network_inference}, \ref{sec:non_parametric})

The Chapters 4 and 5 constitute the heart of this thesis. The contributions can be resumed as follows:

* In Chapter 4, we ask whether a certain class of powerful probabilistic models, namely the class of stochastic block models, comply with two important properties found in real-world networks, namely preferential attachment and homophily. More specifically we study two probabilistic models, the \ifm and the \imb and show that in their standard formulation they do not comply with the homophily and the preferential attachment. However, we show that \imb comply with the local preferential attachment where only edges within communities are considered.
* In Chapter 5, we proposed a new stochastic block model that extends the \imb model in order to model weighted networks. Particularly, a hierarchical Beta-Gamma prior is proposed to have a flexible block-block parameter distributions. We develop an efficient inference algorithm able to scale on networks with millions of edges, and we evaluate and compare the model with various types of large real-world networks. We empirically show that the performance on the link prediction task can be improved when the networks are partially observed.

<!--In chapter 6, we present our model implementation through a platform that we released under an open source license. The platform implement a design pattern to help the development and sharing of complex experiments.-->


