# Conclusion

<!-- 
A chapter that concludes the thesis by summarising the learning points
and outlining future areas for research
-->


<!-- thesis summary -->
Our world is composed with all kind of objects that are interconnected. They can be represented by networks which capture the relational information between those objects. Among them, social networks and information networks exhibit common properties that are used to characterize them. These networks can be analyzed with probabilistic models to learn their structures and make predictions. In particular, the class of mixed-membership models offer a rich framework to capture overlapping community structure with shared components in a probabilistic setting. We studied two characteristic nonparametric models in this class, namely the IMMSB and ILFM that respectively represents latent class models and latent feature models. More precisely, we ask whether those models comply with other important properties found in real-world networks. We showed that those models can be configured to learn latent variables that either capture a homophilic mixing pattern or not, and in consequence the models are flexible with regard to the detection of community with the regular equivalence or the structural equivalence. Moreover, we show that those models do not satisfy the preferential attachment effect in the global case, but that IMMSB can satisfy a local preferential attachment when the degree are considered within a community only. We conducted experiments that empirically emphasis that IMMSB may exhibit better performance for real-world networks when few data are observed. We further extended MMSB for weighted networks, to make it compatible with a wider range of large-scale networks, and empirically showed that it constitutes a good choice for real-world networks, again when few data are observed.

<!-- future work -->
Our work could be extended in several directions. First, the models can be extended in order to be trained with more general types of networks. Indeed, slight modifications of the kernel likelihood in the mixed-membership models are necessary to model multi-relational graphs, or even better multi-relational weighted graphs. This could be particularly interesting for information networks such as lexical networks and ontologies whereas the type of the edges can often be described with categorical data (one can think about the grammatical relation between words). A more profound research direction concerns the relaxation of the exchangeability assumption of graphs. An important limitation of this assumption is that the graphs generated by such models are either dense or empty. The interest of this question is especially interesting because it is related to temporal graphs modeling. Indeed, when the data distribution is dependent on the order on which we observe edges and nodes, the model is no more exchangeable and one can interpret this as a temporal dependency. A crucial question in this direction is to find the form of the invariants, or the symmetry groups, that are relevant to temporal networks as well as the corresponding model representations.
